Tapes on the air.
Okay, Lee, I'll ask you first of all, just give us a little bit about your background
and why, what in your background might have led you to write science fiction?
Okay.
Well, I've been writing since I was about 11 or 12, you know, writing all sorts of things,
mostly adolescent sort of things when I was a kid.
But when I was in high school, I started reading science fiction.
It was just sort of natural to go from reading it to writing it.
Most people can't help themselves.
They have any inclination toward writing, you know, and they read science fiction.
They'll usually try and write it.
Were you interested?
You were, what interested you about science fiction?
Was it the, or fantasy?
Was it the hardware or just the sense of wonder, quote unquote, that sort of thing?
Well, I don't know, it's hard to say.
I was older than most people.
Most people start reading it when they're seven or 12 or something like that.
So I suppose I should have had a good reason being 17 instead of seven, but I don't, it
was just, it just appealed to me.
You know, I always liked fairy tales and fantasy kind of things.
And of course I read those things, the books you don't think of as science fiction before.
I actually started reading science fiction like 1984 and I enjoyed those.
It just, you know, I have pretty eclectic taste and it was just one of the things I like to read.
Okay, if I remember right from your background, you have a degree in history.
Was that, does history and interest in history and maybe an interest in fantasy go hand in
hand and has that helped you in your writing?
That kind of, oh yeah, yeah, I think it does.
I think in fantasy and looking at what has happened, you can sort of extrapolate to what
might happen.
You know, I think it's good to be able to look both ways when you're interested in science
fiction, you know.
Did you, you seem, your story so far indicate that you're more interested in science fiction
than fantasy.
Is that a marketing choice or is that where you're particular on this slide?
That's, yeah, that's my interest.
I can't seem to write for markets.
If I could, I would be writing a lot more and selling, you know.
Yeah, but I pretty much write what I'm interested in.
I don't think about, but I'd like to think that what I'm writing will sell, but I don't
aim it toward a particular magazine or market.
Are you a full-time writer?
No.
You support your reading habit some other way.
Yeah, I work at the Austin Community College as a typist.
Okay.
Yeah.
So you can't have it launched out?
No.
Okay.
All right, when I read your stories and I am, I'm not an English professor.
The other guy who's not here as an English professor, I'm a chemist, so I see things
a little different, but I like to look at the literary aspects.
One unifying thing that I saw in your stories seemed to be communication and mainly misunderstandings
between people and misunderstandings between people and people and people and aliens and
they get themselves in situations where all they had to do was just understand each other
a little bit.
Is that something conscious that you are trying to show or is that a theme?
No.
That's the first time I've ever thought about a common theme in my writing, but I suppose
that's true.
It's probably, everybody has sort of an obsession and I think, it's not an obsession, but it's
an important thing for me.
I'm a fairly social person and I like to communicate and that's why I write and so communication
is important.
Okay.
The first four stories that you wrote, well, okay, I can scratch that.
Another thing that's common to me and I read them all, you wrote them over a number of years.
I read them all in an afternoon, I'm saving them.
Another thing that seems to be universally in your stories is power struggles.
You've got a power struggle between two sets of people or individuals or people in institutions.
That sort of thing.
Is that something that you consciously do or is that?
Do you have money?
Yeah.
Well, that could be partly from personal experience.
In my adolescence, I had to deal with some institutions and I wasn't raised in orphanage
or anything, but there were institutions that affected my personal life and I didn't like
it.
And also, I grew up in the 60s and I think we tend to pick up things like that in these
certain years and it's hard to shake those values and I think one of the things is, you
know, individuals trying to work against things that they don't think are right in institutions
and people having to struggle against big powers that they feel they have no control over but
they want to try and they have to do something.
Another thing in your writing style, you concentrate quite a bit on sensory descriptions, how something
feels or tastes or textures.
It's almost like Jack Vance, he's more visual but there's this sensory thing in there that
I like and enjoy that seems that's another trademark that I kind of picked out from reading
your stories in one sitting.
Is that something that you ever thought about before?
No, I don't think so.
That's very nice.
Do you notice things like textures and things like that?
Oh, seem to put them in.
Yeah.
Yeah, I think so.
Yeah, I guess it's hard to compare things like that to other people.
I don't know what other people, if they notice how fabrics feel and how things smell but
I think it's important.
It adds immediacy to a story.
I know I read a lot of fiction where people don't put in sensory details and you feel
like you're sort of floating through somebody's dream.
I know if you smell and taste and touch the world they've created, it makes a lot more
immediate.
I kind of like that feeling of actually being there.
I know there's a lot of people who like dream-like, stream of consciousness fiction but I like
immediate.
Okay, the first four stories.
Helen seemed to break the trend but involved scientists and their work and they were doing
research.
I can think of the people, the oceanographers talking with the whales and the linguistics
person and they do some research and some are doing administration.
You seem to know a lot about research because I do research and you seem to have captured
some of that, the spirit of that, both the spirit of research and the bummer of having
to deal with administrators and that sort of thing.
Have you worked around the research areas?
I guess that's such a big element in the work.
Yeah, well I worked in a hospital for, or in hospitals for 10 years and I think that
gives you an idea of how people have to deal with research and trying to apply things in
administrative hang-ups and stuff like that because you know, sit and listen to the doctors
saying, oh we came up with this wonderful thing but they're not going to let us use
it of course.
But I've never really worked in research.
I guess the hospital is probably the main background.
Okay.
Sure.
I noticed that the idea that I set things in like research labs and I have scientists
doing things, I looked back on my stories like just a few months ago and I realized that
almost every story is like that and it kind of horrified me that I'd done so many of the
same things and I just thought I'm going to not do that as much.
I just finished a story that, you know, same thing, it's like an educated, well a research
institute and I like to think that I was doing something different every time I was writing
and I looked back and I said, wow, look, everything's set in a lab or done by scientists but it's
hard not to do that when you're trying to extrapolate from science and stuff.
Well as somebody who does that and also like science, I don't like hard science fiction
as a rule but very few people actually in science fiction capture what it's like to
do research.
Most of the time it's the genius scientist that probably has a beautiful daughter or
something.
No lab in his basement.
Not everybody, not all of us are geniuses and there's just a lot of hard work in keeping
your nose to the grindstone and screwing around with politics and the administrators and all
that and that's what you seem to have captured and is what interested me because Benford
writes about what scientists are really like, what happens when you really do research but
by and large science fiction although it's science, they don't really treat scientists
as people.
Yeah, they're romantic knights of science.
Or the Darth Vader's of science.
Yeah, it's the opposite.
Okay, I wanted to ask you, okay, the second story that you wrote Whales song was this,
do you have a thing for Whales?
I mean, I do, that's what interested me about it but because they're so big and intelligent
and you're going to get blown away.
Well, yeah, I like Whales, I don't have a thing against them.
And I like their little cousins, the dolphins even.
You know, but actually the story came to me while I was reading about the Eskimos and
I really intended to write the story about the Eskimos more than the Whales but the Whales
of course became the most important thing in the story because it's a symbol of all
sorts of things but somehow the story didn't come out weighted as much toward being a story
about Eskimos as Whales.
I can see that it would be like the Eskimos though, yeah.
In the miscommunication and the generation gap.
I will also would like to ask you to pronounce the fourth story speaking to the tenth and
say how would you say the title?
When I talk about it, I just say speaking to others because I can't remember those
numbers.
I have to look it up every time I write it down.
It's terrible, I don't think I'll ever write a title like that again.
Well, it's a very catchy title so you just say speaking to others, speaking to others,
don't put to the twentieth.
No, no.
So when we refer to that if we can.
You can just say speaking to others.
One thing I know is too and to tail silence, that's actually kind of a space opera, that
sort of thing, it's a love story.
You've got the Cassiopeans, yeah and you also had them in story number four in speaking
to others, speaking to others.
Are you building some kind of known space?
No.
Or consistent?
No, not really.
What for the off-planet stories I've written, I used a book called Habitable Planets for
Man as a reference and I used all the G-type stars within twenty light years and sort of
it turns out it's the same stars all the time because those are the ones that are nearest.
Okay, Helen was a different kind of story from the rest.
It was the first one, the first published one that wasn't in a research library thing
and it's a planet kind of like Colorado.
Was this kind of a homesick ode to the old state?
Well actually I wrote it when I was still living in Colorado and took a while to sell
it but I don't know, I just can't imagine that if people lived on L5s, in a way that
sort of goes back to Salamander too, I can't imagine people living in tin cans and being
happy and I can't imagine that when those, I mean I can see if we do colonize space
like with L5s and such that some of the older ones will be obsolete eventually, you know
the technology will boom.
And so I thought well what would they do with the old ones and why not make them tourist places
and since I grew up in Colorado and I know that there are tourists all over the mountains,
you know I thought well preserve a piece of that up there, you know for people to go to.
The idiosyncratic, that's the right thing that I found out was the Pakistanis.
Yeah.
All things in Pakistan is it and they were quite interesting. Was that a real direct
opposite of the kind of wasp inhabitants? Yeah.
Just to counterpoint their differences. Yeah I like to stick unlikely things in together,
it's fun. That's not that unlikely though, you know it's just something you wouldn't expect.
That's your, is Helen whose face launched 28th kind of Soviet hovercraft year title?
Yeah. Do your titles stick by and large on the short stories?
So far I have a hard time with titles, sometimes I come up with pretty good titles but then they're
titles I don't especially care for. Well Whalesong has been a title of about three different
stories, you know it's sort of a natural like Swan song kind of title and so I kind of regret that
I didn't come up with something that nobody else would have thought of and I think like detailed
silence is sort of a dull title now, now that I look back on it and I kind of but
um yeah that's not one of my, I have a hard time thinking up titles a lot of the times
but Helen I thought of the title first and then the story.
Okay so far you've written short stories and I noticed there's at least one that's coming out
fairly soon. What about a novel? Are you contemplating a novel? Are you a novelist?
Do you have or you're going to have to write a novel so you can write full time?
Well yeah there's no livelihood in writing short stories. I don't have any novels planned.
I wrote two novels when I first started writing science fiction but they're
in my closet and I'm glad I didn't sell them. It'd be embarrassing.
The story I just finished not too long ago, her furry face. I had been planning a novel and I had
this 20 page outline well maybe 15 page outline and I had all these plots and subplots and
it was one day I looked at it and I said oh all that's boring except for this one little bit
you know and I said I'll just write it a short story so I did.
And it's sold. No not yet.
Okay.
Since you do have a real job, a real world job in writing what are your curious what are the
people whom you type for and work with you? What do they think about your writing?
Oh they think it's wonderful. They're proud of me.
Science fiction doesn't have the... When I used to work in the hospital
and I'd first start working or when I first sold a story I'd tell people I sold science fiction
they go oh like Julie thought you were a wonderful person until then. I was like telling people
you wrote true confessions or you know something like that and I noticed after Star Wars it seemed
to make a big difference. People you know say well I also write science fiction. I've sold
some stories and they go oh really wow that's wonderful you know and they're all the people
I work with have always been really proud of me and they you know somebody mentioned science fiction
they say oh our secretary is a science fiction writer. I'm really proud of that. It's funny.
Okay one last question how do you if you had your druthers how would you like for it to work out?
Would you like to get better and better short stories and just be able to to sit and write
or do you kind of like your life? Kind of content with the writing and the real job and that sort
of thing. Oh I would love to write full time you know then hopefully someday you know I don't have
anything against writing novels at all you know I know there's some people that's oh novels you
know short stories are the form but I want to be able to write and make a living at it and I wouldn't
write novels just to make a living you know. I won't write a novel just to make money you know
if I have an idea and I think it'd be a good novel I'll write it until then I guess I'll just have to
type at the college. Sounds good I hope you get to it. I guess the one thing that facing short
story writers is the the number of markets there aren't there are not a whole lot of markets for
short stories. No. I don't think there's got is the economy going to have to change that's what
you can ask about anything. Well during the the depression in the 30s there were more magazines
and more books being published because it was cheap entertainment you know but looks like with
television and stuff like that it's going to be a little different this time if there is a
you know big depression in the economy I don't know if people necessarily turn to the printed
word for you know entertainment. If they read. Yeah. I don't know it
it it it's a sad thing because there isn't really any place for beginning writers to sell their
borderline I mean you know they're almost publishable stuff whereas it used to be
people could get a start I mean not that I want junk to be printed but it's
it's just hard to compete compete and people should have the opportunity I mean everybody's
got to sell a story that they're not proud of to begin with you know very few people start out with
great stories and I think writers need all the encouragement they can get and being
published is the biggest so it's sad that there aren't places for new writers. Okay thank you very
much. You're welcome.